LEVAS:
Actually I have only three thoughts.

The first one is connected to the concept of ADHD, which you try to elaborate in the first part of article. My personal understanding of ADHD as concept is best described in Colman Nefsky and B. Arts article  “A CONCEPTUAL HISTORY OF ATTENTION DEFICIT AND HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER”. I am sending you my own copy with the highlights that you could see what I feel essential and what supports the idea, that the concept at the moment still reflects more historic-political context than observable or scientifically defined entity (e.g. madness is observable while schizophrenia scientific though both are defined very poorly). If this holds true that our patients’ pool consists from people suffering from similar condition but for unknown number of reasons, we would be very lucky if we’d got any stronger correlation, in other words could find one or few underlying mechanisms. But you succeeded in that you’ve found this gender difference, which is really very impressive! I want to stress that we have at least three levels, which our training could possibly affect – aetiology (cause), mechanism and symptom (expression). It would be wise to explain plainly that we don’t expect that our training affect the causes of symptoms but do expect it to affect some symptoms underlying mechanisms. And we rightly expected to find that our training will affect symptoms at least as much as placebo would.

The second thought is connected with the transfer from learning to reality. I believe such transfer requires very specific training and doesn’t happen by itself. In the early years of my psychotherapeutic practice I taught my patients special relaxation techniques and practiced them myself. I know very well that after the person has established working conscious control on previously uncontrolled physiological function, he first must be trained to exercise this control briefly, which is done usually connecting the memory of achieved specific state to some half-conscious organismic function like breathing or sublime muscle tension in a very small muscle. When this is learnt, the patient we used to expose the patient to the group, where he had to exercise the acquired skill “in the field” yet still controlled and supported by the group. Each time patients were invited to discuss in the group what prevented them to use successfully the acquired skill etc. Only then some patients have been able to use this skill and actually benefitted from treatment in the “open life”. The whole process took almost 3 months. In other words transfer from training to reality is a very specific process, which must be attended very carefully, building the preconscious level association in memory and physiological conditions.

Last thought. The idea to look at LC is really bright. Indeed here I would expect the most significant findings. However what I would be looking for are thresholds. I mean that learning consciousàunconscious control usually happens in jumps – for long time nothing happens and then suddenly the skill is acquired. It is well known to educators and therapists and now the idea is overused in educating practices. The literature is vast. I think we should look together on LC’s and try to find the signs of threshold happening. Then we could think how to interpret it.

EDUA:
In my own reading I wasm focusing on the introduction and background.


The introduction and background aims to be short but the flow of the text clearly needs some work. In particular the elements that are new to me (outside what I looked at in my gradu) need further work to integrate smoothly with my text. Perhaps the discussion of the more modern NFB protocols on page 4 and in particular the theory of SCP should be opened up more?


In the research design I don’t understand the purpose of mixing classical learning and inverse training. Opening up the theory would help in the empirical part to explain why it makes sense to add up the normal, inverse and transfer. Now it is not properly explained why H1d is something to investigate. What is the cognitive mechanisms that is triggered by an intervention that mixes normal, inverse and transfer NFB?  Now the manuscript just says the intervention increases self-regulation, but does not specify theoretically how.


Another comment is that especially EQ2 needs theoretical reasoning to motivate the exploration. Why  look for difference based on age and gender? For age I can see where we could find justification, but cannot see where to find justification for exploring differences based on gender.
